WHY RELATIONAL?
---------------

Relational query languages were much simpler than the state of the art at the time they were invented:
  Tree-based datastores (like IMS)
  Graph databases

Why are relational engines so much better than other types of engines?
  *rich program analysis*
  Relational engines can decompose a query into simple primitives, then map & reduce them.
  Essentially, they enable query optimizations.
  They can anticipate IO lookups and compare different plans.
  *Data lineage* is another key benefit
    Without well-formed primitives, it's hard to tell which parts of the query were expensive or where things came from.

Graph db:
  Very little to make sense of besides depth-first, breadth first.
  Finding clicks, cycles, strongly connected componenets.
  If data can be so generic, queries can only get so complex.
  Relational is more imposing.

Optimization process:
  Query in SQL comes in
  Parse it into (naive) query plan. This is phrased as a tree of relational operators (select, project, join, etc)
  Query optimizer basically generates all permutations of the plan, cost them by referencing the catalogue, then picks the best one.

TODO: check out the Postgres catalogue.

Scaling relational databases:
  Shard vertically or horizontally.
  At some level, you resort to some other way of sharding
  DynamoDB did this first by adding no relational semantics
  Spanner is trying to do this and keep full relational semantics
    The hard part is transactions and guarantees, by the way.

CAP theorem:
  partition tolerance (tolerating two components not talking to each other)
    distributed systems always have to have this, bc things always go down
  consistency
  availability

  basically gotta choose between consistency and availability.
  spanner has mitigated cost of a partition as much as possible
  PAXOS (old, hard) and RAFT (new, simpler)

TODO: our SQL dialect should map more closely to relational algebra than postgres SQL. Simpler.

RELATIONAL OPERATORS
--------------------

Primitives:
  selection (sigma)
  projection (pi): A - B: things in A not in B
  crossproduct (x): all possible combos of rows in each table, concatenated
  union (U): requires same fields: end w more rows
  set difference (-)

Derived operators:
  intersection: R - (R - S): things in R, minus the the things in R that aren't in S
  join (bowtie): ⋈(age < 18)
    More expensive to do a complete cross product THEN filter, so we'll implement this as operator(s).
  natural join

Useful because there are a discrete number of ways to change plans around to generate a plan space.


What's happening now in relational DBs?
---------------------------------------

Evolution. More built-in functions, user-defined types, optimizations.
Some are taking in-memory and column stores more seriously.
Optimization - pretty good place right now.

Stonebreaker: relational is great, but row stores are never really the best case. Blunt tool.
  OLTP: in memory
  Analytics: columnar
  Others: graph, noSQL, matrix-oriented (like K)

Cassandra: non-relational, SQL-like.
  Engine makes fewer assumptions about what data looks like, relational things aren't possible.
  SQL would be parsed into some other kind of executable plan.
  LOL that Uber requires all DBMSs to be Cassandra.


Example:
--------
Find names of suppliers who supply any part that's red

SELECT suppliers.name
WHERE catalog.sid = supplier.sid, catalog.pid = parts.pid, parts.color = red

PI (SELECT (X (X (PI parts (pid, color)), (PI catalog (pid, sid))), (PI supplier (sid, name))) color = red) name


NP hard: Optimal solution can't be discovered in polynomial time, only exponential time.
NP complete: the set of all possible problems that we've discovered as being NP hard.

Polynomial time: n^2: manageable.
Exponential time: 2^n: TERRIBLE

P=NP: Funny thing is we're stuck with polynomial time solution, but also haven't been able to prove that there isn't a poly time solution.
the thing we can't prove is wrong (that things we think are non-polynomial might actually be polynomial)

? Cross product vs natural join?
  - If no cols in common, must cross product
  - If col in common, natural join an option
  - Join == selection on cross product


HW:
---
Get a SQL parser generator (Bison?), map whatever it outputs to our operators
Parser generator, takes a grammar, produces a parser. https://www.gnu.org/software/bison/


Things still to build:
----------------------
- Memory manager component: malloc won't cut it
- Transactions

